# Kafka Add On Module Release 0.2.0

Welcome to the latest release of `kafka` module of the [`SIGHUP Distribution`](https://github.com/sighupio/distribution) maintained with â¤ï¸ by team [SIGHUP by ReeVo](https://sighup.io/).

## Component Images ðŸš¢

| Component                | Supported Version                                                                                      | Previous Version |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| `Strimzi Operator`       | [`v0.42.0`](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/releases/tag/0.42.0)                     | `v0.31.1`        |
| `Monitoring configs`     | `v0.2.0`                                                                                               | `v0.1.0`         |

> Please refer to the individual release notes to get detailed information on each release.

## Bug Fixes and Changes ðŸ›

- Strimzi operator upgraded to `v0.42.0`
- Add support for Kafka versions `3.6.0`, `3.6.1`, `3.6.2`, `3.7.0`, `3.7.1`
- Starting with Kafka versions >= `3.5` ZooKeeper has been deprecated and set to be removed with Kafka version `4`
- Starting with Kafka version `3.7.x` older client protocol API version (pre 2.1.0) and support for Java 11 (broker/tools) are deprecated and set to be removed with Kafka version `4`.

## Breaking Changes ðŸ’”

- Drop support for Kafka versions < `3.6.0`

## Update Guide ðŸ¦®

The upgrade procedure consists in two steps:

1. Upgrade the operator.
2. Upgrade the Kafka cluster.

### 1. Upgrade the operator

Apply the new operator, the new deployment will start with the v0.42.0 running. If there are Kafka clusters of an unsupported version the operator will print an `unsupported version` warning. This will be resolved with the next step.

### 2. Upgrade the Kafka cluster

Edit the Kafka resource of the target cluster and change the version to `3.7.1` or another supported version (`3.6.0`, `3.6.1`, `3.6.2`, `3.7.0`, `3.7.1`). Also change the config section and add the following parameters:

```yaml
...
  config:
    ...
    log.message.format.version: <CURRENT_VERSION>
    inter.broker.protocol.version: <CURRENT_VERSION>
```
Where `<CURRENT_VERSION>` is the version of the Kafka cluster before the upgrade.

Apply the modified Kafka resource. Wait for the operator to reconcile the cluster. Once done, check that everything is working correctly.

#### Rolling back the upgrade

In case of errors the upgrade can be rolled back downgrading the operator to the previous version and undoing the changes to the Kafka resource.

#### Finalizing the upgrade

If everything works correctly the upgrade can be finalized changing the `<CURRENT_VERSION>` for the config mentioned before to the target version of the upgrade. Wait for the operator to reconcile the cluster and then the upgrade is concluded.

For more information about the upgrade procedure please read Kafka upgrade [documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/37/documentation.html#upgrade).

## Package Strimzi operator! ðŸ“¦

Strimzi provides a way to run an Apache KafkaÂ® cluster on Kubernetes or OpenShift in various deployment configurations.

Our package will be installed as a cluster wide operator, managing clusters on all namespaces.

## Package Monitoring configs! ðŸ“¦

This package contains the required configurations to monitor the operator and the Kafka clusters using Prometheus and Grafana.
It is based on the [SIGHUP Monitoring][module-monitoring] module.

## Package deployment ðŸš€

To install all the packages, see the [deployment section](../../README.md#deployment) of the main README.

<!-- Links -->

[module-monitoring]: https://github.com/sighupio/module-monitoring


